Mr. Chair,
I think Hohanna just put her hands up.
Okay.
Is she trying to show us something,
or?
Apparently trying. Yeah.
Mm.
I can't see it.
Hmm.
Good morning,
Dr Alicia. Very good to have you here,
and Liz as well, very good to have you here.
Welcome to the
Ovarian Cancer Foundation of New Zealand.
We have you here for a 15-minute session,
and we have all read your submission and also want to
say how good and touching it was to have you
here in Parliament
recently.
Obviously, quite touching as well given the passing of the
lady on the cover as well just before.
Just want to acknowledge all of that, and
grateful for you
reaching out to the committee and for the information and advocacy you're doing
around ovarian cancer. And, that's enough of me
rattling on. You have all the information. So I'll hand it over to you.
So you've got 15 minutes. I know members would appreciate some of that
time being left to allow us to ask questions. Kia ora.
Kia ora. Thank you. So, tena koutou katoa. Nga mihi nui ke koutou katoa.
So kia ora. I'm Liz Pennington,
and I'm the Chief Executive and
Lived Experience Facilitation Lead for the Ovarian Cancer Foundation.
Pleased to be here with you today. Thank you for the opportunity.
Kia ora. My name's Dr Alicia Didsbury, and I'm a scientist at the University of
Auckland and a trustee for the Ovarian Cancer Foundation New Zealand.
So just in terms of words of introduction from us, we're pleased to be
here today as representatives of the foundation.
Our mission in the foundation is to improve ovarian
cancer care today while funding transformational
research to find tomorrow's cure.
We'd like to acknowledge the work of the Health Select Committee,
acknowledge you as Chair, Sam, and your work and consideration of
matters pertaining to health services.
Thank you for the time provided to meet with us today.
We're here further to our visit and the launch of the State of Ovarian Cancer
Report in the Grand Hall in February, not that long ago.
We prepared a report which was informed by the voices of
wāhine, woman, of woman
with lived experience of ovarian cancer, and subsequent to
the foundation undertaking three surveys last year.
One, a survey of the New Zealand public undertaken by
an external consulting company, Public Voice.
The second, a survey of general practitioners, and the third, a
survey of women with lived experience.
The findings were compelling, and the data gathered is
evident in the report provided and its identification of
actions that'll transform outcomes that we'd like to speak to you
about today.
So the state of ovarian cancer in Aotearoa New Zealand currently, in simple
terms, 306 women diagnosed every year, and
nearly half of those within emergency departments across the
country.
207 women dying every year, 30%
within one year of diagnosis, and a five-year survival
rate of only 42.8%.
The statistics paint a clear picture of the nature of this disease
and the level of lethality, making it imperative that we have a
coordinated, responsive plan in place which is informed by women
and their families and groups like ourselves.
We're committed to working with you to move forward
and to save lives.
We have clear evidence and data showing that there are low levels of
awareness of the signs and symptoms of ovarian cancer,
a misconception that cervical screening also screens for
ovarian cancer, which it does not,
and issues around access to
ultrasound being a primary issue delaying diagnosis.
It's our view that the evidence clearly points to more that can and
should be done. The case for investment is compelling,
and we know that women's lives can be saved.
So you've just heard the reality of ovarian cancer in New Zealand.
The statistics are pretty stark. So let's talk about what we can do
about it. I think the evidence is pretty clear, and importantly, the
solutions are also very clear.
So if we think about diagnosis and the fact that nearly half of our women are
diagnosed through ED,
we think this is not a system that's working well.
This is a system that's reacting too late.
But we can change this. Firstly, we need to improve ovarian cancer
awareness by adding symptoms education into the national screening
program and clearly communicating that cervical screening
does not detect ovarian cancer.
Secondly, we must improve access to diagnosis by allowing
GPs to directly refer symptomatic women to ultrasound.
So in Australia, this pathway exists, and emergency
diagnosis rates are significantly lower, around 21 to
28%, compared to nearly 50% here.
This is a clear and achievable intervention that will
save lives.
We also need to identify risk earlier.
So up to 15% of ovarian cancers are hereditary, and
yet too many women are identified after diagnosis.
We're calling for lower thresholds for BRCA and genetic testing, the
development of a familial cancer registry, and legislation to prevent
genetic discrimination by insurers.
At present, fear of insurance consequences is actively preventing
people from getting tested.
Once women are diagnosed, the system is not equipped to meet demand.
New Zealand has just seven gyne oncologists.
That's around half what's needed for a population our size.
This is compounded by unacceptably slow access to medicines.
For example, bevacizumab took 12 years to fund, and Kelix
remains unfunded after 18 years.
This is why expanding access to clinical trials is also so important,
because it provides us earlier access to cutting-edge therapies.
There are also significant data gaps across our systems, and we
need good data to make the right decisions.
We strongly support the development of an ovarian cancer registry through the
CanShare initiative, which will provide real-time accessible
data across the healthcare system.
This requires an investment of approximately $2 million to establish,
and this is a pretty modest investment when you think about the foundational tool
that will guide better care and better access to research and outcomes.
And so finally, we will not shift the dial without sustained
investment in research. Progress in ovarian cancer has been
limited over many decades, and we're calling for increased government
funding of ovarian cancer research, alongside the development
of a national ovarian cancer research strategy.
One that aligns clinical care, biomedical research, data
equity, and ensures New Zealand women are not left behind.
Underpinning all of this, we must continue to involve women with lived
experience in the design, delivery, and evaluation of our
services, because the solutions we are proposing here
are grounded in their voices.
This is not a problem without solutions.
I think we've identified clear, achievable actions that will shift
outcomes. But what we need now is commitment.
The cost of inaction is really clear, but the opportunity to change
this is in front of us. Ngā mihi nui.
Thank you very much.
And thank you for the opportunity to present to you the data and insights
from the report. We would like to close and just
acknowledge Ruby Smith,
the late Ruby Smith, her photo is behind me.
You'll see here on the front of our report that's been sent
to you. She was a strong ovarian cancer advocate,
and wanted to be in Parliament with us in February and speak as part of the
presentation, but unfortunately passed away a few days before
that. And some words from Ruby,
entitled, What Women Need Now.
"It's easy to talk about the need for research, and we need it.
But what women really need right now is support that feels human,
clear pathways,
honest conversations, and care that meets us where we
are. Awareness has to go beyond symptoms.
It has to include what it means to truly live with ovarian
cancer." So we acknowledge Ruby and her family.
Thank you for the opportunity.
Thank you. Thank you to both of you. We have some questions.
Over to Clare.
Yeah. Thanks very much. Lovely to see you both again.
Acknowledging Ruby and the fact that her funeral was actually on the day of that
presentation, as I understand it.
And also, my mother passed away from ovarian cancer and was
misdiagnosed. So my question is really
unpacking the issues around it being largely
asymptomatic and also capturing a whole lot of different cancers.
What are the solutions you see, or how do you overcome that
challenge? And secondly, from an awareness-raising perspective, what
advice would you give to young women who are at a GP and
feeling that perhaps they're not getting the type of attention or
urgency that they might need to with the symptoms they are experiencing?
So look, that's two really good questions.
So thank you, and just want to acknowledge
the experience that you're sharing with us too as well. So thank you for that.
What I would say is that the low levels of
awareness are a primary issue that are impacting right
across. We know from the public survey that whilst about
85% of Kiwis had heard of ovarian cancer,
most knew very few or no symptoms at all.
Similarly, when we looked at surveying women, most had heard of ovarian
cancer, but in terms of ability to name some symptoms, very few could
name any at all, perhaps one. So we've got low levels of awareness
and understanding about what the symptoms are.
There are symptoms, and just having an awareness of those
can enable women to take action and go and be
seen. Some of the experiences of women are quite variable,
so there's not one experience that women were uniformly
describing to us. It was a range. And for some women, they were
repeatedly going,
raising concerns, talking about issues that they had, but had a
sense of being dismissed and might have, for example, been
to their general practitioner four or five times without being referred
for any testing at all.
So I think it begins with awareness.
It begins with the promotion of the signs and symptoms so that we're all empowered
to take action.
It also begins with support for health professional
staff in terms of education programs and the
assistance that they need to be responsive with resources,
those sorts of things, and we're doing lots of work around that.
And I think the key then really is, again,
making sure that for our young women, because you specifically referenced that,
that they have an understanding what their cervical screen test is for,
but also what it does not. Similarly, with the HPV vaccine,
many of the young women in that age group, 18 to 34 in particular,
think that HPV vaccine means they can't get ovarian cancer,
and that's not correct either. So I think it begins with empowering the individual.
Women are active in this space. They're taking action.
They're doing the things that are required.
We need to wrap some more support around them, and
provide much better quality information than we are.
Yeah
Thanks, Anne. Do other members have questions?
Well, yeah.
Hamish.
Excellent. CanShare was mentioned in your
presentation.
CanShare captures a number of cancers.
What's the barrier there for ovarian cancer to be included in that?
Would you like me to speak to that? Yeah.
Look, I think there's not currently a barrier
for ovarian cancer to be included in that.
The barrier for CanShare is getting over the line, full stop.
So at the moment, they're just in the process of doing a trial
data collection, and the idea would be that next in
line is ovarian cancer registry to be rolled out.
But they're still lacking funding, and they still need the
mechanisms to bring all of that together.
It's a huge project,
but they're proposing that ovarian cancer is used as a trial because of the
number of patients that it would include.
So it works really well, but it needs to be supported.
Yes. Thank you.
Jane.
Thank you for your submission. It's been very interesting.
One of the things you've mentioned a couple of times is funding.
Can you
extrapolate out what you think is needed
to be funded in this area?
Because you just mentioned research. You've also mentioned the other project.
Do you have a clear idea of where the funding, what's missing?
I mean, thank you for the
question. We've spoken, or Alicia's just responded in terms of
the funding that would be required to establish a registry.
So we know that that's $2 million investment and potentially around
150K a year to manage that going forward.
So we've been in dialogue with CanShare and the work of John
Fountain. So we'd want to acknowledge that we are supportive of it.
In terms of the other areas of work,
if we look at the cervical screening program and the information that helps
support women to understand that
the
screening program that they're enrolled in, and that they're attending and being
attentive to, doesn't test for ovarian cancer, I would suggest to
you that that's cost neutral. You know, that there is an opportunity actually to
implement that change that we're recommending at no cost at all.
Then when it comes to other things that we've talked about, such
as research,
there is some funding of research through Health Research
Council, but it's been limited. The foundation itself, we
fundraise to support research funding each
year. So we can certainly share with you the details of what we're
currently funding,
and have funded over half a million dollars probably.
In the last few years, we've just supported an $80,000
grant, some travel grants, some professional development grants, and we've got a
commitment to two further $80,000 grants this year.
That's not a reflection perhaps of what's needed, but certainly what we're
able to contribute into the space.
Because as I said before, we want to be part of this.
In terms of the awareness work, we're producing pamphlets,
materials, guides,
all sorts of things and again, fundraising to
do that, but we can certainly share some information with you around that.
I'll just pass to Alicia to see if she would like to add anything further to your
questions.
Absolutely, yeah. Just speaking specifically in the research
space, there are a couple of very key needs that would
really benefit from investment. One is in the early diagnosis space, in
the development of diagnostics, and the second is
for those patients who are already refractory to current
treatments.
We need to be developing more medicines.
We're almost at time. We are actually over.
But Hamish, assure me it's only a very short one.
Yes, excellent. Thank you. You talk about
including ovarian cancer with the cervical screening program.
To my knowledge, we don't really have easy
diagnostic tests. What do you mean?
Or are you just trying to add information and awareness
as people go through that screening
program?
Yeah, correct.
Currently, we don't have any access to screening for ovarian cancer or
any good, clear diagnostic tests.
This would really be around symptoms awareness.
What the cervical screen tests for and what it doesn't test for
is a really critical bit of information that is currently lacking from that
program.
Yes, and thank you.
Hey, thank you very much, Alicia and Liz, for coming
in, and your presentation and all your advocacy and hard work in
this really important space.
The committee has very much appreciated you coming here and presenting to us today.
Take care. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for having us.
Thank you for having us. Ngā mihi.